---
author: "Rahul Sinha"
title: "An elegant solution to address the problem of fake cheques"
date: 2018-02-03T17:56:44+05:30
draft: false
---

Isn’t it ironic that we are talking about cheque fraud in an era of high technology and instantaneous payments ? Nevertheless this is a problem that is very real even in today’s world. Cheque fraud can be of several types — counterfeit or fake cheques, using a genuine cheque but forging the signature and finally altering details of beneficiary fraudulently. In this article we will mainly focus on the first problem of counterfeit or fake cheques.

There have always been sporadic incidents involving fake cheques and banks and regulators keep updating the security features and specifications to identify genuine cheques. However, of late there have been some cases which have not been detected through the regular scrutiny and processing and have therefore resulted in monetary losses for the banks and account holders. As of now, it may appear on the surface to be a minor headache, it has already resulted in large financial losses in some instances such that it warrants a serious look at this issue. Moreover, by undermining the credibility of the system as a whole it can affect economic activity at large.


Typically the cheques issued by banks have to comply with strict guidelines in terms of embedded security features as well as steps to be followed during the processing. But the fraudsters also have access to sophisticated technology which can replicate most of these features on counterfeit cheques and make it impossible to distinguish between the original and the fake especially in image based cheque processing. It is also possible to get the signatures of the original account holder through underhand means so as to pass through that checkpoint too. But, technology is a double edged tool — and also provides a way to address this problem !

One way to do this is to add a secure digitally signed QR code (like the one provided by our company Qryptal) with details such as cheque number, account number and bank code stored inside. State of the art technology ensures that this high security, tamperproof code can only be created by the issuing bank. This QR code is machine readable and the information inside can be cross checked with the the MICR information to validate the cheque and identify the fraudulent ones. Most importantly the QR code is unique for each cheque and can only be generated by the issuing organization. The technology can be easily integrated with the existing infrastructure and can handle the necessary processing volumes. In addition, it is privacy friendly with no dependency on cloud and no sharing of customer sensitive information.

An easy to implement solution which can take care of a potential landmine and does not need a significant reworking of current workflow of cheque processing. Have you come across instances of cheque fraud ? Can you think of a better way to address this problem ?